accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall be
elected.

6. The President shall, at stated times, receive for his services a
compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the
period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive
within that period any other emolument from the United States, or any of
them.

7. Before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the
following oath or affirmation:--"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I
will faithfully execute the office of President of the United States,
and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect, and defend the
Constitution of the United States."


SECTION 2. 1. The President shall be commander-in-chief of the army and
navy of the United States, and of the militia of the several States,
when called into the actual service of the United States; he may require
the opinion, in writing, of the principal officer in each of the
executive departments, upon any subject relating to the duties of their
respective offices, and he shall have power to grant reprieves and
pardons for offences against the United States, except in cases of
impeachment.

2. He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the senators present
concur; and he shall nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of
the Senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other public ministers and
consuls, judges of the Supreme Court, and all other officers of the
United States, whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for,
and which shall be established by law: but the Congress may by law vest
the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think proper, in the
President alone, in the courts of law, or in the heads of departments.

3. The President shall have power to fill all vacancies that may happen
during the recess of the Senate, by granting commissions which shall
expire at the end of their next session.


SECTION 3. He shall from time to time give to the Congress information
on the state of the Union, and recommend to their consideration such
measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient; he may, on
extraordinary occasions, convene both Houses, or either of them, and in
case of disagreement between them, with respect to the time of
adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper;
he shall receive ambassadors and other public ministers; he shall take
care that the laws be faithfully executed, and shall commission all the
officers of the United States.


SECTION 4. The President, Vice-President, and all civil officers of the
United States shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and
conviction of, treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.


ARTICLE III

SECTION 1. The judicial power of the United States shall be vested in
one Supreme Court, and in such inferior courts as the Congress may from
time to time ordain and establish. The judges, both of the Supreme and
inferior courts, shall hold their offices during good behaviour, and
shall, at stated times, receive for their services a compensation, which
shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.


SECTION 2. 1. The judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law and
equity, arising under this Constitution, the laws of the United States,
and treaties made, or which shall be made, under their authority;--to
all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls;--to
all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction;--to controversies to
which the United States shall be a party;--to controversies between two
or more States;--between a State and citizens of another
State;[9]--between citizens of different States;--between citizens of
the same State claiming lands under grants of different States;--and
between a State, or the citizens thereof, and foreign States, citizens,
or subjects.

2. In all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and
consuls and those in which a State shall be a party, the Supreme Court
shall have original jurisdiction. In all the other cases before
mentioned, the Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction, both as
to law and fact, with such exceptions and under such regulations as the
Congress shall make.

3. The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by
jury; and such trial shall be held in the State where the said crimes
shall have been committed; but when not committed within any State, the
trial shall be at such place or places as the Congress may by law have
directed.


SECTION 3. 1. Treason against the United States shall consist only in
levying war against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them
aid and comfort. No person shall be convicted of treason unless on the
testimony of two witnesses to the same overt act, or on confession in
open court.

2. The Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason,
but no attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood or forfeiture
except during the life of the person attainted.


ARTICLE IV

SECTION 1. Full faith and credit shall be given in each State to the
public acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every other State. And
the Congress may by general laws prescribe the manner in which such
acts, records, and proceedings shall be proved, and the effect thereof.


SECTION 2. 1. The citizens of each State shall be entitled to all
privileges and immunities of citizens in the several States.

2. A person charged in any State with treason, felony, or other crime,
who shall flee from justice, and be found in another State, shall on
demand of the executive authority of the State from which he fled, be
delivered up, to be removed to the State having jurisdiction of the
crime.

3. No person held to service or labor in one State, under the laws
thereof, escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any law or
regulation therein, be discharged from such service or labor, but shall
be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or labor may
be due.


SECTION 3. 1. New States may be admitted by the Congress into this
Union; but no new State shall be formed or erected within the
jurisdiction of any other State; nor any State be formed by the junction
of two or more States, or parts of States, without the consent of the
legislatures of the States concerned as well as of the Congress.

2. The Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful
rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property
belonging to the United States; and nothing in this Constitution shall
be so construed as to prejudice any claims, of the United States, or of
any particular State.


SECTION 4. The United States shall guarantee to every State in this
Union a republican form of government, and shall protect each of them
against invasion; and on application of the legislature, or of the
executive (when the legislature cannot be convened), against domestic
violence.


ARTICLE V

The Congress, whenever two-thirds of both Houses shall deem it
necessary, shall propose amendments to this Constitution, or, on the
application of the legislatures of two-thirds of the several States,
shall call a convention for proposing amendments, which, in either case,
shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of this Constitution,
when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several
States, or by conventions in three-fourths thereof, as the one or the
other mode of ratification may be proposed by the Congress; provided
that no amendment which may be made prior to the year one thousand eight
hundred and eight shall in any manner affect the first and fourth
clauses in the ninth Section of the first article; and that no State,
without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the
Senate.


ARTICLE VI

1. All debts contracted and engagements entered into, before the
adoption of this Constitution, shall be as valid against the United
States under this Constitution, as under the Confederation.

2. This Constitution and the laws of the United States which shall be
made in pursuance thereof and all treaties made, or which shall be made,
under the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of
the land; and the judges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything
in the Constitution or laws of any State to the contrary
notwithstanding.

3. The senators and representatives before mentioned, and the members of
the several State legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers,
both of the United States and of the several States, shall be bound by
oath or affirmation to support this Constitution; but no religious test
shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust
under the United States.


ARTICLE VII

The ratification of the conventions of nine States shall be sufficient
for the establishment of this Constitution between the States so
ratifying the same.

Done in Convention by the unanimous consent of the States present the
seventeenth day of September in the year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-seven and of the independence of the United States of
America the twelfth. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our
names,

     G^O. WASHINGTON--
     Presidt. and Deputy from Virginia

[and thirty-eight members from all the States except Rhode Island.]

       *       *       *       *       *


Articles in addition to, and amendment of, the Constitution of the
United States of America, proposed by Congress, and ratified by the
legislatures of the several States pursuant to the fifth article of the
original Constitution.


ARTICLE I[10]

Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of
speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to
assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.


ARTICLE II

A well regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free
State, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be
infringed.


ARTICLE III

No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house, without
the consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be
prescribed by law.


ARTICLE IV

The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers,
and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be
violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause,
supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place
to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.


ARTICLE V

No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous
crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury, except in
cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in
actual service in time of war or public danger; nor shall any person be
subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or
limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness
against himself; nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without
due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use,
without just compensation.


ARTICLE VI

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district
wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have
been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and
cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against
him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor,
and to have the assistance of counsel for his defence.


ARTICLE VII

In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed
twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no
fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise reexamined in any court of the
United States, than according to the rules of the common law.


ARTICLE VIII

Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor
cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.


ARTICLE IX

The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be
construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.


ARTICLE X

The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor
prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively,
or to the people.


ARTICLE XI[11]

The judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend
to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the
United States by citizens of another State, or by citizens or subjects
of any foreign State.


ARTICLE XII[12]

The electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by ballot
for President and Vice-President, one of whom at least shall not be an
inhabitant of the same State with themselves; they shall name in their
ballots the person voted for as President, and in distinct ballots the
person voted for as Vice-President, and they shall make distinct lists
of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as
Vice-President, and of the number of votes for each, which lists they
shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the
government of the United States, directed to the President of the
Senate;--The President of the Senate shall, in presence of the Senate
and House of Representatives, open all the certificates and the votes
shall then be counted;--The person having the greatest number of votes
for President, shall be the President, if such number be a majority of
the whole number of electors appointed; and if no person have such
majority, then from the persons having the highest numbers not exceeding
three on the list of those voted for as President, the House of
Representatives shall choose immediately, by ballot, the President. But
in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by States, the
representation from each State having one vote; a quorum for this
purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the
States, and a majority of all the States shall be necessary to a choice.
And if the House of Representatives shall not choose a President
whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them, before the fourth
day of March next following, then the Vice-President shall act as
President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional
disability of the President. The person having the greatest number of
votes as Vice-President, shall be the Vice-President, if such number be
a majority of the whole number of electors appointed, and if no person
have a majority, then from the two highest members on the list, the
Senate shall choose the Vice-President; a quorum for the purpose shall
consist of two-thirds of the whole number of senators, and a majority of
the whole number shall be necessary to a choice. But no person
constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible
to that of Vice-President of the United States.


ARTICLE XIII[13]

SECTION 1. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a
punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted,
shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their
jurisdiction.

SECTION 2. Congress shall have power to enforce this article by
appropriate legislation.


ARTICLE XIV[14]

SECTION 1. All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and
subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States
and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any
law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the
United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty,
or property without due process of law; nor deny to any person within
its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.

SECTION 2. Representatives shall be apportioned among the several States
according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number of
persons in each State, excluding Indians not taxed. But when the right
to vote at any election for the choice of electors for President and
Vice-President of the United States, representatives in Congress, the
executive and judicial officers of a State, or the members of the
legislature thereof, is denied to any of the male inhabitants of such
State, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United States,
or in any way abridged, except for participation in rebellion or other
crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the
proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the
whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.

SECTION 3. No person shall be a senator or representative in Congress,
or elector of President and Vice-President, or hold any office, civil or
military, under the United States, or under any State, who, having
previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of
the United States, or as a member of any State legislature, or as an
executive or judicial officer of any State, to support the Constitution
of the United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion
against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof. But
Congress may by two-thirds vote of each House, remove such disability.

SECTION 4. The validity of the public debt of the United States,
authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of pensions and
bounties for services in suppressing insurrection or rebellion, shall
not be questioned. But neither the United States nor any State shall
assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or
rebellion against the United States, or any claim for the loss or
emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations, and claims
shall be held illegal and void.

SECTION 5. The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate
legislation, the provisions of this article.


ARTICLE XV[15]

SECTION 1. The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not
be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of
race, color, or previous condition of servitude.

SECTION 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by
appropriate legislation.


ARTICLE XVI[16]

The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from
whatever source derived, without apportionment among the several States,
and without regard to any census or enumeration.


ARTICLE XVII[17]

The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two senators from
each State, elected by the people thereof, for six years; and each
senator shall have one vote. The electors in each State shall have the
qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the
State legislature.

When vacancies happen in the representation of any State in the Senate,
the executive authority of each State shall issue writs of election to
fill such vacancies: _Provided_ that the legislature of any State may
empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments until the
people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct.

This amendment shall not be so construed as to effect the election or
term of any senator chosen before it becomes valid as part of the
Constitution.


ARTICLE XVIII[18]

SECTION 1. After one year from the ratification of this article the
manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors within, the
importation thereof into, or the exportation thereof from the United
States and all territory subject to the jurisdiction thereof for
beverage purposes is hereby prohibited.

SECTION 2. The Congress and the several States shall have concurrent
power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.

SECTION 3. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been
ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of the
several States, as provided in the Constitution, within seven years from
the date of the submission hereof to the States by the Congress.


ARTICLE XIX[19]

The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied
or abridged by the United States or any State on account of sex.

The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate
legislation.



POPULATION OF THE UNITED STATES, BY STATES: 1920, 1910, 1900

+---------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|      STATES         |                  POPULATION                |
+                     +--------------+--------------+--------------+
|                     |     1920     |     1910     |     1900     |
+---------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
|United States        | 105,708,771  |  91,972,266  |  75,994,575  |
+---------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
|Alabama              |   2,348,174  |   2,138,093  |   1,828,697  |
|Arizona              |     333,903  |     204,354  |     122,931  |
|Arkansas             |   1,752,204  |   1,574,449  |   1,311,564  |
|California           |   3,426,861  |   2,377,549  |   1,485,053  |
|Colorado             |     939,629  |     799,024  |     539,700  |
|Connecticut          |   1,380,631  |   1,114,756  |     908,420  |
|Delaware             |     223,003  |     202,322  |     184,735  |
|District of Columbia |     437,571  |     331,069  |     278,718  |
|Florida              |     968,470  |     752,619  |     528,542  |
|Georgia              |   2,895,832  |   2,609,121  |   2,216,331  |
|Idaho                |     431,866  |     325,594  |     161,772  |
|Illinois             |   6,485,280  |   5,638,591  |   4,821,550  |
|Indiana              |   2,930,390  |   2,700,876  |   2,516,462  |
|Iowa                 |   2,404,021  |   2,224,771  |   2,231,853  |
|Kansas               |   1,769,257  |   1,690,949  |   1,470,495  |
|Kentucky             |   2,416,630  |   2,289,905  |   2,147,174  |
|Louisiana            |   1,798,509  |   1,656,388  |   1,381,625  |
|Maine                |     768,014  |     742,371  |     694,466  |
|Maryland             |   1,449,661  |   1,295,346  |   1,188,044  |
|Massachusetts        |   3,852,356  |   3,366,416  |   2,805,346  |
|Michigan             |   3,668,412  |   2,810,173  |   2,420,982  |
|Minnesota            |   2,387,125  |   2,075,708  |   1,751,394  |
|Mississippi          |   1,790,618  |   1,797,114  |   1,551,270  |
|Missouri             |   3,404,055  |   3,293,335  |   3,106,665  |
|Montana              |     548,889  |     376,053  |     243,329  |
|Nebraska             |   1,296,372  |   1,192,214  |   1,066,300  |
|Nevada               |      77,407  |      81,875  |      42,335  |
|New Hampshire        |     443,407  |     430,572  |     411,588  |
|New Jersey           |   3,155,900  |   2,537,167  |   1,883,669  |
|New Mexico           |     360,350  |     327,301  |     195,310  |
|New York             |  10,384,829  |   9,113,614  |   7,268,894  |
|North Carolina       |   2,559,123  |   2,206,287  |   1,893,810  |
|North Dakota         |     645,680  |     577,056  |     319,146  |
|Ohio                 |   5,759,394  |   4,767,121  |   4,157,545  |
|Oklahoma             |   2,028,283  |   1,657,155  |     790,391  |
|Oregon               |     783,389  |     672,765  |     413,536  |
|Pennsylvania         |   8,720,017  |   7,665,111  |   6,302,115  |
|Rhode Island         |     604,397  |     542,610  |     428,556  |
|South Carolina       |   1,683,724  |   1,515,400  |   1,340,316  |
|South Dakota         |     636,547  |     583,888  |     401,570  |
|Tennessee            |   2,337,885  |   2,184,789  |   2,020,616  |
|Texas                |   4,663,228  |   3,896,542  |   3,048,710  |
|Utah                 |     449,396  |     373,351  |     276,749  |
|Vermont              |     352,428  |     355,956  |     343,641  |
|Virginia             |   2,309,187  |   2,061,612  |   1,854,184  |
|Washington           |   1,356,621  |   1,141,990  |     518,103  |
|West Virginia        |   1,463,701  |   1,221,119  |     958,800  |
|Wisconsin            |   2,632,067  |   2,333,860  |   2,069,042  |
|Wyoming              |     194,402  |     145,965  |      92,531  |
+---------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+

FOOTNOTES:

[3] Partly superseded by the 14th Amendment, p. 639.

[4] See the 17th Amendment, p. 641.

[5] _Ibid._, p. 641.

[6] See the 16th Amendment, p. 640.

[7] The following paragraph was in force only from 1788 to 1803.

[8] Superseded by the 12th Amendment, p. 638.

[9] See the 11th Amendment, p. 638.

[10] First ten amendments proposed by Congress, Sept. 25, 1789.
Proclaimed to be in force Dec. 15, 1791.

[11] Proposed Sept. 5, 1794. Declared in force January 8, 1798.

[12] Adopted in 1804.

[13] Adopted in 1865.

[14] Adopted in 1868.

[15] Proposed February 27, 1869. Declared in force March 30, 1870.

[16] Passed July, 1909; proclaimed February 25, 1913.

[17] Passed May, 1912, in lieu of paragraph one, Section 3, Article I,
of the Constitution and so much of paragraph two of the same Section as
relates to the filling of vacancies; proclaimed May 31, 1913.

[18] Ratified January 16, 1919.

[19] Ratified August 26, 1920.




APPENDIX

TABLE OF PRESIDENTS

NAME                    STATE  PARTY     YEAR IN    VICE-PRESIDENT
                                         OFFICE
1 George Washington      Va.    Fed.    1789-1797   John Adams
2 John Adams             Mass.  Fed.    1797-1801   Thomas Jefferson
3 Thomas Jefferson       Va.    Rep.    1801-1809   Aaron Burr
                                                    George Clinton
4 James Madison          Va.    Rep.    1809-1817   George Clinton
                                                    Elbridge Gerry
5 James Monroe           Va.    Rep.    1817-1825   Daniel D. Tompkins
6 John Q. Adams          Mass.  Rep.    1825-1829   John C. Calhoun
7 Andrew Jackson         Tenn.  Dem.    1829-1837   John C. Calhoun
                                                    Martin Van Buren
8 Martin Van Buren       N.Y.   Dem.    1837-1841   Richard M. Johnson
9 Wm. H. Harrison        Ohio   Whig    1841-1841   John Tyler
10 John Tyler[20]        Va.    Whig    1841-1845
11 James K. Polk         Tenn.  Dem.    1845-1849   George M. Dallas
12 Zachary Taylor        La.    Whig    1849-1850   Millard Fillmore
13 Millard Fillmore[20]  N.Y.   Whig    1850-1853
14 Franklin Pierce       N.H.   Dem.    1853-1857   William R. King
15 James Buchanan        Pa.    Dem.    1857-1861   J.C. Breckinridge
16 Abraham Lincoln       Ill.   Rep.    1861-1865   Hannibal Hamlin
                                                    Andrew Johnson
17 Andrew Johnson[20]    Tenn.  Rep.    1865-1869
18 Ulysses S. Grant      Ill.   Rep.    1869-1877   Schuyler Colfax
                                                    Henry Wilson
19 Rutherford B. Hayes   Ohio   Rep.    1877-1881   Wm. A. Wheeler
20 James A. Garfield     Ohio   Rep.    1881-1881   Chester A. Arthur
21 Chester A. Arthur[20] N.Y.   Rep.    1881-1885
22 Grover Cleveland      N.Y.   Dem.    1885-1889   Thomas A. Hendricks
23 Benjamin Harrison     Ind.   Rep.    1889-1893   Levi P. Morton
24 Grover Cleveland      N.Y.   Dem.    1893-1897   Adlai E. Stevenson
25 William McKinley      Ohio   Rep.    1897-1901   Garrett A. Hobart
                                                    Theodore Roosevelt
26 Theodore Roosevelt[20]N.Y.   Rep.    1901-1909   Chas. W. Fairbanks
27 William H. Taft       Ohio   Rep.    1909-1913   James S. Sherman
28 Woodrow Wilson        N.J.   Dem.    1913-1921   Thomas R. Marshall
29 Warren G. Harding     Ohio   Rep.    1921-       Calvin Coolidge


FOOTNOTES:

[20] Promoted from the vice-presidency on the death of the president.

POPULATION OF THE OUTLYING POSSESSIONS: 1920 AND 1910

----------------------------------------+--------------+---------------
                AREA                    |     1920     |     1910
----------------------------------------+--------------+---------------
United States with outlying possessions |117,857,509   | 101,146,530
                                        +--------------+---------------
Continental United States               |105,708,771   | 91,972,266
Outlying Possessions                    | 12,148,738   |  9,174,264
                                        +--------------|---------------
  Alaska                                |     54,899   |     64,356
  American Samoa                        |      8,056   |      7,251[21]
  Guam                                  |     13,275   |     11,806
  Hawaii                                |    255,912   |    191,909
  Panama Canal Zone                     |     22,858   |     62,810[21]
  Porto Rico                            |  1,299,809   |  1,118,012
  Military  and  naval,  etc.,  service |              |
    abroad                              |    117,238   |     55,608
  Philippine Islands                    |10,350,640[22]|  7,635,426[23]
  Virgin Islands of the United States   |    26,051[24]|     27,086[25]
----------------------------------------+--------------+---------------

FOOTNOTES:

[21] Population in 1912.

[22] Population in 1918.

[23] Population in 1903.

[24] Population in 1917.

[25] Population in 1911.




A TOPICAL SYLLABUS

As a result of a wholesome reaction against the purely chronological
treatment of history, there is now a marked tendency in the direction of
a purely topical handling of the subject. The topical method, however,
may also be pushed too far. Each successive stage of any topic can be
understood only in relation to the forces of the time. For that reason,
the best results are reached when there is a combination of the
chronological and the topical methods. It is therefore suggested that
the teacher first follow the text closely and then review the subject
with the aid of this topical syllabus. The references are to pages.


=Immigration=

     I. Causes: religious (1-2, 4-11, 302), economic (12-17, 302-303),
        and political (302-303).
     II. Colonial immigration.
       1. Diversified character: English, Scotch-Irish, Irish, Jews,
          Germans and other peoples (6-12).
       2. Assimilation to an American type; influence of the land
          system (23-25, 411).
       3. Enforced immigration: indentured servitude, slavery, etc.
          (13-17).
     III. Immigration between 1789-1890.
       1. Nationalities: English, Irish, Germans, and Scandinavians
          (278, 302-303).
       2. Relations to American life (432-433, 445).
     IV. Immigration and immigration questions after 1890.
       1. Change in nationalities (410-411).
       2. Changes in economic opportunities (411).
       3. Problems of congestion and assimilation (410).
       4. Relations to labor and illiteracy (582-586).
       5. Oriental immigration (583).
       6. The restriction of immigration (583-585).

=Expansion of the United States=

     I. Territorial growth.
       1. Territory of the United States in 1783 (134 and color map).
       2. Louisiana purchase, 1803 (188-193 and color map).
       3. Florida purchase, 1819 (204).
       4. Annexation of Texas, 1845 (278-281).
       5. Acquisition of Arizona, New Mexico, California, and other
          territory at close of Mexican War, 1848 (282-283).
       6. The Gadsden purchase, 1853 (283).
       7. Settlement of the Oregon boundary question, 1846 (284-286).
       8. Purchase of Alaska from Russia, 1867 (479).
       9. Acquisition of Tutuila in Samoan group, 1899 (481-482).
       10. Annexation of Hawaii, 1898 (484).
       11. Acquisition of Porto Rico, the Philippines, and Guam at
           close of Spanish War, 1898 (493-494).
       12. Acquisition of Panama Canal strip, 1904 (508-510).
       13. Purchase of Danish West Indies, 1917 (593).
       14. Extension of protectorate over Haiti, Santo Domingo, and
           Nicaragua (593-594).
     II. Development of colonial self-government.
       1. Hawaii (485).
       2. Philippines (516-518).
       3. Porto Rico (515-516).
     III. Sea power.
       1. In American Revolution (118).
       2. In the War of 1812 (193-201).
       3. In the Civil War (353-354).
       4. In the Spanish-American War (492).
       5. In the Caribbean region (512-519).
       6. In the Pacific (447-448, 481).
       7. The role of the American navy (515).

=The Westward Advance of the People=

     I. Beyond the Appalachians.
       1. Government and land system (217-231).
       2. The routes (222-224).
       3. The settlers (221-223, 228-230).
       4. Relations with the East (230-236).
     II. Beyond the Mississippi.
       1. The lower valley (271-273).
       2. The upper valley (275-276).
     III. Prairies, plains, and desert.
       1. Cattle ranges and cowboys (276-278, 431-432).
       2. The free homesteads (432-433).
       3. Irrigation (434-436, 523-525).
     IV. The Far West.
       1. Peculiarities of the West (433-440).
       2. The railways (425-431).
       3. Relations to the East and Europe (443-447).
       4. American power in the Pacific (447-449).

=The Wars of American History=

     I. Indian wars (57-59).
     II. Early colonial wars: King William's, Queen Anne's, and King
         George's (59).
     III. French and Indian War (Seven Years' War), 1754-1763 (59-61).
     IV. Revolutionary War, 1775-1783 (99-135).
     V. The War of 1812, 1812-1815 (193-201).
     VI. The Mexican War, 1845-1848 (276-284).
     VII. The Civil War, 1861-1865 (344-375).
     VIII. The Spanish War, 1898 (485-497).
     IX. The World War, 1914-1918 [American participation, 1917-1918]
         (596-625).

=Government=

     I. Development of the American system of government.
       1. Origin and growth of state government.
         _a._ The trading corporation (2-4), religious congregation
              (4-5), and proprietary system (5-6).
         _b._ Government of the colonies (48-53).
         _c._ Formation of the first state constitutions (108-110).
         _d._ The admission of new states (_see_ Index under each
              state).
         _e._ Influence of Jacksonian Democracy (238-247).
         _f._ Growth of manhood suffrage (238-244).
         _g._ Nullification and state sovereignty (180-182, 251-257).
         _h._ The doctrine of secession (345-346).
         _i._ Effects of the Civil War on position of states (366,
              369-375).
         _j._ Political reform--direct government--initiative,
              referendum, and recall (540-544).
       2. Origin and growth of national government.
         _a._ British imperial control over the colonies (64-72).
         _b._ Attempts at intercolonial union--New England
              Confederation, Albany plan (61-62).
         _c._ The Stamp Act Congress (85-86).
         _d._ The Continental Congresses (99-101).
         _e._ The Articles of Confederation (110-111, 139-143).
         _f._ The formation of the federal Constitution (143-160).
         _g._ Development of the federal Constitution.
           (1) Amendments 1-11--rights of persons and states (163).
           (2) Twelfth amendment--election of President (184, note).
           (3) Amendments 13-15--Civil War settlement (358, 366, 369,
               370, 374, 375).
           (4) Sixteenth amendment--income tax (528-529).
           (5) Seventeenth amendment--election of Senators (541-542).
           (6) Eighteenth amendment--prohibition (591-592).
           (7) Nineteenth amendment--woman suffrage (563-568).
       3. Development of the suffrage.
         _a._ Colonial restrictions (51-52).
         _b._ Provisions of the first state constitutions
              (110, 238-240).
         _c._ Position under federal Constitution of 1787 (149).
         _d._ Extension of manhood suffrage (241-244).
         _e._ Extension and limitation of negro suffrage (373-375,
              382-387).
         _f._ Woman suffrage (560-568).
     II. Relation of government to economic and social welfare.
       1. Debt and currency.
         _a._ Colonial paper money (80).
         _b._ Revolutionary currency and debt (125-127).
         _c._ Disorders under Articles of Confederation (140-141).
         _d._ Powers of Congress under the Constitution to coin money
              (_see_ Constitution in the Appendix).
         _e._ First United States bank notes (167).
         _f._ Second United States bank notes (257).
         _g._ State bank notes (258).
         _h._ Civil War greenbacks and specie payment (352-353, 454).
         _i._ The Civil War debt (252).
         _j._ Notes of National Banks under act of 1864 (369).
         _k._ Demonetization of silver and silver legislation
              (452-458).
         _l._ The gold standard (472).
         _m._ The federal reserve notes (589).
         _n._ Liberty bonds (606).
       2. Banking systems.
         _a._ The first United States bank (167).
         _b._ The second United States bank--origin and destruction
              (203, 257-259).
         _c._ United States treasury system (263).
         _d._ State banks (258).
         _e._ The national banking system of 1864 (369).
         _f._ Services of banks (407-409).
         _g._ Federal reserve system (589).
       3. The tariff.
         _a._ British colonial system (69-72).
         _b._ Disorders under Articles of Confederation (140).
         _c._ The first tariff under the Constitution (150, 167-168).
         _d._ Development of the tariff, 1816-1832 (252-254).
         _f._ Tariff and nullification (254-256).
         _g._ Development to the Civil War--attitude of South and West
              (264, 309-314, 357).
         _h._ Republicans and Civil War tariffs (352, 367).
         _i._ Revival of the tariff controversy under Cleveland (422).
         _j._ Tariff legislation after 1890--McKinley bill (422),
              Wilson bill (459), Dingley bill (472), Payne-Aldrich bill
              (528), Underwood bill (588).
       4. Foreign and domestic commerce and transportation
          (_see_ Tariff, Immigration, and Foreign Relations).
         _a._ British imperial regulations (69-72).
         _b._ Confusion under Articles of Confederation (140).
         _c._ Provisions of federal Constitution (150).
         _d._ Internal improvements--aid to roads, canals, etc.
              (230-236).
         _e._ Aid to railways (403).
         _f._ Service of railways (402).
         _g._ Regulation of railways (460-461, 547-548).
         _h._ Control of trusts and corporations (461-462, 589-590).
       5. Land and natural resources.
         _a._ British control over lands (80).
         _b._ Early federal land measures (219-221).
         _c._ The Homestead act (368, 432-445).
         _d._ Irrigation and reclamation (434-436, 523-525).
         _e._ Conservation of natural resources (523-526).
       6. Legislation advancing human rights and general welfare
          (_see_ Suffrage).
         _a._ Abolition of slavery: civil and political rights of
              negroes (357-358, 373-375).
         _b._ Extension of civil and political rights to women
              (554-568).
         _c._ Legislation relative to labor conditions (549-551,
              579-581, 590-591).
         _d._ Control of public utilities (547-549).
         _e._ Social reform and the war on poverty (549-551).
         _f._ Taxation and equality of opportunity (551-552).

=Political Parties and Political Issues=

     I. The Federalists _versus_ the Anti-Federalists [Jeffersonian
        Republicans] from about 1790 to about 1816 (168-208, 201-203).
       1. Federalist leaders: Hamilton, John Adams, John Marshall,
          Robert Morris.
       2. Anti-Federalist leaders: Jefferson, Madison, Monroe.
       3. Issues: funding the debt, assumption of state debts, first
          United States bank, taxation, tariff, strong central
          government _versus_ states' rights, and the Alien and
          Sedition acts.
     II. Era of "Good Feeling" from about 1816 to about 1824, a period
         of no organized party opposition (248).
     III. The Democrats [former Jeffersonian Republicans] _versus_ the
          Whigs [or National Republicans] from about 1832 to 1856
         (238-265, 276-290, 324-334).
       1. Democratic leaders: Jackson, Van Buren, Calhoun, Benton.

       2. Whig leaders: Webster and Clay.
       3. Issues: second United States bank, tariff, nullification,
          Texas, internal improvements, and disposition of Western
          lands.
     IV. The Democrats _versus_ the Republicans from about 1856 to the
         present time (334-377, 388-389, 412-422, 451-475, 489-534,
         588-620).
       1. Democratic leaders: Jefferson Davis, Tilden, Cleveland,
          Bryan, and Wilson.
       2. Republican leaders: Lincoln, Blaine, McKinley, Roosevelt.
       3. Issues: Civil War and reconstruction, currency, tariff,
          taxation, trusts, railways, foreign policies, imperialism,
          labor questions, and policies with regard to land and
          conservation.
     V. Minor political parties.
       1. Before the Civil War: Free Soil (319) and Labor Parties
          (306-307).
       2. Since the Civil War: Greenback (463-464), Populist (464),
          Liberal Republican (420), Socialistic (577-579), Progressive
         (531-534, 602-603).

=The Economic Development of the United States=

     I. The land and natural resources.
       1. The colonial land system: freehold, plantation, and manor
          (20-25).
       2. Development of the freehold in the West (220-221, 228-230).
       3. The Homestead act and its results (368, 432-433).
       4. The cattle range and cowboy (431-432).
       5. Disappearance of free land (443-445).
       6. Irrigation and reclamation (434-436).
       7. Movement for the conservation of resources (523-526).
     II. Industry.
       1. The rise of local and domestic industries (28-32).
       2. British restrictions on American enterprise (67-69, 70-72).
       3. Protective tariffs (see above, 648-649).
       4. Development of industry previous to the Civil War (295-307).
       5. Great progress of industry after the war (401-406).
       6. Rise and growth of trusts and combinations (406-412,
          472-474).
     III. Commerce and transportation.
       1. Extent of colonial trade and commerce (32-35).
       2. British regulation (69-70).
       3. Effects of the Revolution and the Constitution
          (139-140, 154).
       4. Growth of American shipping (195-196).
       5. Waterways and canals (230-236).
       6. Rise and extension of the railway system (298-300).
       7. Growth of American foreign trade (445-449).
     IV. Rise of organized labor.
       1. Early phases before the Civil War: local unions, city
          federations, and national unions in specific trades
          (304-307).
       2. The National Trade Union, 1866-1872 (574-575).
       3. The Knights of Labor (575-576).
       4. The American Federation of Labor (573-574).
         _a._ Policies of the Federation (576-577).
         _b._ Relations to politics (579-581).
         _c._ Contests with socialists and radicals (577-579).
         _d._ Problems of immigration (582-585).
       5. The relations of capital and labor.
         _a._ The corporation and labor (410, 570-571).
         _b._ Company unions and profit-sharing (571-572).
         _c._ Welfare work (573).
         _d._ Strikes (465, 526, 580-581).
         _e._ Arbitration (581-582).

=American Foreign Relations=

     I. Colonial period.
       1. Indian relations (57-59).
       2. French relations (59-61).
     II. Period of conflict and independence.
       1. Relations with Great Britain (77-108, 116-125, 132-135).
       2. Establishment of connections with European powers (128).
       3. The French alliance of 1778 (128-130).
       4. Assistance of Holland and Spain (130).
     III. Relations with Great Britain since 1783.
       1. Commercial settlement in Jay treaty of 1794 (177-178).
       2. Questions arising out of European wars [1793-1801]
          (176-177, 180).
       3. Blockade and embargo problems (193-199).
       4. War of 1812 (199-201).
       5. Monroe Doctrine and Holy Alliance (205-207).
       6. Maine boundary--Webster-Ashburton treaty (265).
       7. Oregon boundary (284-286).
       8. Attitude of Great Britain during Civil War (354-355).
       9. Arbitration of _Alabama_ claims (480-481).
       10. The Samoan question (481-482)
       11. The Venezuelan question (482-484).
       12. British policy during Spanish-American War (496-497).
       13. Controversy over blockade, 1914-1917 (598-600).
       14. The World War (603-620).
     IV. Relations with France.
       1. The colonial wars (59-61).
       2. The French alliance of 1778 (128-130).
       3. Controversies over the French Revolution (128-130).
       4. Commercial questions arising out of the European wars
          (176-177, 180, 193-199).
       5. Attitude of Napoleon III toward the Civil War (354-355).
       6. The Mexican entanglement (478-479).
       7. The World War (596-620).
     V. Relations with Germany.
       1. Negotiations with Frederick, king of Prussia (128).
       2. The Samoan controversy (481-482).
       3. Spanish-American War (491).
       4. The Venezuelan controversy (512).
       5. The World War (596-620).
     VI. Relations with the Orient.
       1. Early trading connections (486-487).
       2. The opening of China (447).
       3. The opening of Japan (448).
       4. The Boxer rebellion and the "open door" policy (499-502).
       5. Roosevelt and the close of the Russo-Japanese War (511).
       6. The Oriental immigration question (583-584).
     VII. The United States and Latin America.
       1. Mexican relations.
         _a._ Mexican independence and the Monroe Doctrine (205-207).
         _b._ Mexico and French intervention--policy of the United
              States (478-479).
         _c._ The overthrow of Diaz (1911) and recent questions