_Angioma_, _lymphangioma_, and _neuroma_ are described with the disease
of the individual tissues.


MALIGNANT CONNECTIVE-TISSUE TUMOURS--SARCOMA

The term sarcoma is applied to any connective-tissue tumour which
exhibits malignant characters. The essential structural feature is the
predominance of the cellular elements over the intercellular substance
or stroma, in which respect a sarcoma resembles the connective tissue of
the embryo. The typical sarcoma consists chiefly of immature or
embryonic connective tissue. It most frequently originates from fascia,
intermuscular connective tissue, periosteum, bone-marrow, and skin, and
forms a rounded or nodulated tumour which appears to be encapsulated,
but the capsule merely consists of the condensed surrounding tissues,
and usually contains sarcomatous elements. The consistence of the tumour
depends on the nature and amount of the stroma, and on the presence of
degenerative changes. The softer medullary forms are composed almost
exclusively of cells; while the harder forms--such as the fibro-,
chondro-, and osteo-sarcoma--are provided with an abundant stroma and
are relatively poor in cells. Degenerative changes may produce areas of
softening or liquefaction which result in the formation of cystic
cavities in the interior of the tumour. The colour depends on the amount
of blood in the tumour, and on the presence of the products of
degeneration.

The blood vessels are usually represented by mere chinks or spaces
between the cells. This peculiarity accounts for the facility with which
haemorrhage takes place into the substance of the tumour, the persistence
of the bleeding when it is incised or ulcerates through the skin, and
the readiness with which the sarcomatous cells are carried off and
infect distant parts through the blood-stream. Sarcomas are devoid of
lymphatics, and unless originating in lymphatic structures--for example,
in the tonsil--they rarely infect the lymph glands. Minute portions of
the tumour grow into the small veins, and, becoming detached, are
transported by the blood-current to distant organs, where they are
arrested in the capillaries and give rise to secondary growths. These
are most frequently situated in the lungs, except when the primary
growth lies within the territory of the portal circulation, in which
case they occur in the liver. The secondary growths closely resemble the
parent tumour. Sarcoma may invade an adjacent vein on such a scale that
if the invading portion becomes detached it may constitute a dangerous
embolus. This may be observed in sarcoma of the kidney, the growth
taking place along the renal vein until it projects into the vena cava.

[Illustration: FIG. 55.--Recurrent Sarcoma of Sciatic Nerve in a woman
aet. 27. Recurrence twenty months after removal of primary growth.]

In its growth, a sarcoma compresses and destroys neighbouring parts,
surrounds vessels and nerves, and may lead to destruction of the skin,
either by invading it, or more commonly by causing sloughing from
pressure. Inflammatory and suppurative changes may take place as a
result of pyogenic infection following upon sloughing of the overlying
skin or upon an exploratory incision. Once the skin is broken the tumour
fungates through the opening. Sarcomas vary in malignancy, especially as
regards rapidity of growth and capacity for dissemination. Certain of
them, such as the so-called "recurrent fibroid of Paget," grow
comparatively slowly, and are only malignant in the sense that they tend
to recur locally after removal; others--especially the more cellular
ones--grow with extreme rapidity, and are early disseminated throughout
the body, resembling in these respects the most malignant forms of
cancer. They are usually solitary in the first instance, although
primary multiple growths are occasionally met with in the skin and in
the bones.

Many varieties of sarcoma are recognised, according to its structural
peculiarities. Thus, in virtue of the size and character of the cells,
we have the _small round-celled_ and the _large round-celled_ sarcoma,
the _small_ and the _large spindle-celled_, the _giant-celled_ and the
_mixed-celled_ sarcoma. The _lympho-sarcoma_ presents a structure
similar to that of lymph-follicular tissue, and the _alveolar sarcoma_
an arrangement of cells in alveoli resembling that seen in cancers. When
there is a considerable amount of intercellular fibrous tissue, the
tumour is called a _fibro-sarcoma_.

[Illustration: FIG. 56.--Fungating Sarcoma of Arm.

(Dr. J. M'Watt's case.)]

The term _lymphangio-sarcoma_ is applied when the cells of the tumour
are derived from the endothelium of lymph spaces and vessels. The
_angio-sarcomas_ are those in which blood vessels form a prominent
element in the structure of the tumour. They are sometimes derived from
innocent angiomas, and they may be so vascular as to pulsate and on
auscultation yield a blowing murmur like an aneurysm. The
_glio-sarcoma_, _myxo-sarcoma_, _chondro-sarcoma_, and _myo-sarcoma_ are
mixed forms which usually develop in pre-existing innocent tumours. The
_osteo-sarcoma_ is characterised by the formation in the tumour of bone,
the medullary spaces being occupied by sarcomatous cells in place of
marrow. The _osteoid sarcoma_ is characterised by the formation of a
tissue resembling bone but deficient in lime salts, and the _petrifying
sarcoma_ by the formation of calcified areas in the stroma. These
varieties, although met with chiefly in the bones, may occur in soft
tissues such as muscle, and in such organs as the mamma. The pigmented
varieties include the _chloroma_, which is of a light-green colour, and
the _melanotic sarcoma_, which is brown or black. The _psammoma_ is a
sarcoma containing a material resembling sand; it is chiefly met with in
the membranes of the brain. The _chordoma_ is a rare form of tumour
originating from the remains of the notochord in the region of the
spheno-occipital synchondrosis or in the sacro-coccygeal region.

_Diagnosis of Sarcoma._--A sarcoma is to be differentiated from an
inflammatory swelling such as results from tubercle, actinomycosis, or
syphilis, from an innocent tumour, and from a cancer. The points on
which the diagnosis is founded are discussed with the different tissues
and organs.

_Treatment._--The removal of the tumour by operation is the most
reliable method of treatment; in order to be successful it must be
undertaken before dissemination has taken place, and a considerable area
of healthy tissue beyond the apparent margin of the growth must be
removed, and in tumours near the surface of the body, the overlying skin
also.

In order to prevent recurrence, a tube of _radium_, to which a silk
thread is attached, is inserted into the space from which the tumour was
removed; the thread is brought out at the drain-opening, and at the end
of a week or ten days the tube of radium is removed by pulling on the
thread. Radium causes a reaction in the tissues attended with exudation
from the vessels, for the escape of which provision must be made. If
radium is not available, the affected area is repeatedly exposed to the
action of the _X-rays_ as soon as the wound has healed. The employment
of these measures has diminished to a remarkable degree the recurrence
of sarcoma after operation.

It will readily be understood that the less thoroughly or radically the
growth has been removed, the more do we depend upon radium or the X-rays
for bringing about a permanent cure, and that in advanced cases of
sarcoma and in cases in which, on account of their anatomical situation,
removal by operation is necessarily incomplete, the prospect of cure is
still more dependent on the use of radium or of the X-rays. Finally,
there are cases in which removal by operation is impossible, the
so-called _inoperable sarcoma_; a tube of radium, to which a silk thread
is attached, is inserted into the substance of the tumour, either
through an opening made by a large trocar, or, when necessary, by open
dissection. A second tube of radium is placed upon the skin over the
tumour and is secured there by a stitch or by a strip of plaster, thus
securing a cross-fire action of the radium rays, both from within and
without, as this is found to be much more efficacious in destroying or
inhibiting the cellular elements of the growth. The tubes of radium are
left _in situ_ for from eight to fourteen days, according to the power
of the radium employed, but are moved about every second day or so in
order that every part of the tumour may be efficiently radiated. If the
tumour shrinks in size after the use of radium and becomes operable, it
should be removed before time is given it to resume its growth. It will
depend upon the subsequent course of the disease, whether or not a
second, or it may be even a third, application of radium will be
required.

Where neither radium nor X-rays is available or applicable, recourse may
be had to the injection of Coley's fluid, a preparation containing the
mixed toxins of the streptococcus of erysipelas and the bacillus
prodigiosus; or of selenium.


EPITHELIAL TUMOURS

An excessive and erratic growth of epithelium is the essential and
distinguishing feature of these tumours. The innocent forms are the
papilloma and the adenoma; the malignant, the carcinoma or cancer.

#Papilloma.#--A papilloma is a tumour which projects from a cutaneous or
mucous surface, and consists of a central axis of vascular fibrous
tissue with a covering of epithelium resembling that of the surface from
which the tumour grows. In the papillomas of the skin--commonly known as
_warts_--the covering consists of epidermis; in those growing from
mucous surfaces it consists of the epithelium covering the mucous
membrane. When the surface epithelium projects as filiform processes,
the tumour is called a _villous papilloma_, the best-known example of
which is met with in the urinary bladder. Papillomatous growths are
also met with in the larynx, in the ducts of the breast, and in the
interior of certain cystic tumours of the breast and of the ovary.
Although papillomas are primarily innocent, they may become the
starting-point of cancer, especially in persons past middle life and if
the papilloma has been subjected to irritation and has ulcerated. The
clinical features and treatment of the various forms of papilloma are
considered with the individual tissues and organs.

#Adenoma.#--An adenoma is a tumour constructed on the type of, and
growing in connection with, a secreting gland. In the substance of such
glands as the mamma, parotid, thyreoid, and prostate, adenomas are met
with as encapsulated tumours. When they originate from the glands of the
skin or of a mucous membrane, they tend to project from the surface, and
form pedunculated tumours or polypi.

Adenomas may be single or multiple, and they vary greatly in size. The
tumour is seldom composed entirely of gland tissue; it usually contains
a considerable proportion of fibrous tissue, and is then called a
_fibro-adenoma_. When it contains myxomatous tissue it is called a
_myxo-adenoma_, and when the gland spaces of the tumour become distended
with accumulated secretion, a _cystic adenoma_, the best examples of
which are met with in the mamma and ovary. A characteristic feature of
the cystic variety is the tendency the tumour tissue exhibits to project
into the interior of the cysts, constituting what are known as
_intracystic growths_. They are essentially innocent, but intracystic
growths, especially in the mamma of women over fifty, should be regarded
with suspicion and therefore should be removed on radical lines.
Transition forms between adenoma and carcinoma are also met with in the
rectum and large intestine, and these should be treated on the same
lines as cancer.


CARCINOMA OR CANCER

A cancer is a malignant tumour which originates in epithelium. The
cancer cells are derived by proliferation from already existing
epithelium, and they invade the sub-epithelial connective tissue in the
form of simple or branching columns. These columns are enclosed in
spaces--termed alveoli--which are probably dilated lymph spaces, and
which communicate freely with the lymph vessels. The cells composing the
columns and filling the alveoli vary with the character of the
epithelium in which the cancer originates. The malignancy of cancer
depends on the tendency which the epithelium has of invading the tissues
in its neighbourhood, and on the capacity of the cells, when
transported elsewhere by the lymph or blood-stream, of giving rise to
secondary growths.

Cancer may arise on any surface covered by epithelium or in any of the
secreting glands of the body, but it is much more common in some
situations than in others. It is frequently met with, for example, in
the skin, in the stomach and large intestine, in the breast, the uterus,
and the external genitals; less frequently in the gall-bladder, larynx,
thyreoid, prostate, and urinary bladder.

Tissues appear to be most liable to cancer when, having attained
maturity, they enter upon the phase of decadence or involution, and this
phase is reached by different tissues at different periods. It is not so
much, therefore, the age of the person in whom it occurs, as the age of
the tissue in which it arises, that determines the maximum incidence of
cancer. Cancer of the stomach appears and attains a maximum frequency
earlier than cancer of the skin; cancer of the uterus and mamma is more
frequent towards the decline of reproductive activity than in the later
years of life; rectal cancer is not infrequently met with during the
second and third decades. There is evidence that the irritation caused
by alcohol and tobacco plays a part in the causation of cancer, in the
fact that a large proportion of those who become the subjects of cancer
of the mouth are excessive drinkers and smokers.

A cancer may appear as a papillary growth on a mucous or a skin surface,
as a nodule in the substance of an organ, or as a diffuse thickening of
a tubular organ such as the stomach or intestine. The absence of
definition in cancerous tumours explains the difficulty of completely
removing them by surgical measures, and has led to the practice of
complete extirpation of cancerous organs wherever this is possible. The
boundaries of the affected organ, moreover, are frequently transgressed
by the disease, and the epithelial infiltration implicates the
surrounding parts. In cancer of the breast, for example, the disease
often extends to the adjacent skin, fat, and muscle; in cancer of the
lip or tongue, to the mandible; in cancer of the uterus or intestine, to
the investing peritoneum.

In addition to its tendency to infiltrate adjacent tissues and organs,
cancer is also liable to give rise to _secondary growths_. These are
most often met with in the nearest lymph glands; those in the neck, for
example, becoming infected from cancer of the lip, tongue, or throat;
those in the axilla, from cancer of the breast; those along the
curvatures of the stomach, from cancer of the pylorus; and those in the
groin, from cancer of the external genitals. In lymph vessels the cancer
cells may merely accumulate so as to fill the lumen and form indurated
cords, or they may proliferate and give rise to secondary nodules along
the course of the vessels. When the lymphatic network in the skin is
diffusely infected, the appearance is either that of a multitude of
secondary nodules or of a diffuse thickening, so that the skin comes to
resemble coarse leather. On the wall of the chest this condition is
known as _cancer en cuirasse_. Although the cancer cells constantly
attack the walls of the adjacent veins and spread into their interior at
a comparatively early period, secondary growths due to dissemination by
the blood-stream rarely show themselves clinically until late in the
course of the disease. It is probable that many of the cancer cells
which are carried away in the blood or lymph stream undergo necrosis and
fail to give rise to secondary growths. Secondary growths present a
faithful reproduction of the structure of the primary tumour. Apart from
the lymph glands, the chief seats of secondary growths are the liver,
lungs, serous membranes, and bone marrow.

It is generally believed that the secondary growths in cancer that
develop at a distance from the primary tumour, those, for example, in
the medullary canal of the femur or in the diploe of the skull occurring
in advanced cases of cancer of the breast, are the result of
dissemination of cancer cells by way of the blood-stream and are to be
regarded as emboli. Sampson Handley disagrees with this view; he
believes that the dissemination is accomplished in a more subtle way,
namely, by the actual growth of cancer cells along the finer vessels of
the lymph plexuses that ramify in the deep fascia, a method of spread
which he calls _permeation_. It is maintained also that permeation
occurs as readily against the lymph stream as with it. He compares the
spread of cancer to that of an invisible annular ringworm. The growing
edge extends in a wider and wider circle, within which a healing process
may occur, so that the area of permeation is a ring, rather than a disc.
Healing occurs by a process of "peri-lymphatic fibrosis," but as the
natural process of healing may fail at isolated points, nodules of
cancer appear, which, although apparently separate from the primary
growth, have developed in continuity with it, peri-lymphatic fibrosis
having destroyed the cancer chain connecting the nodule with the primary
growth. This centrifugal spread of cancer is clearly seen in the
distribution of the subcutaneous secondary nodules so frequently met
with in the late stages of mammary cancer. The area within which the
secondary nodules occur is a circle of continually increasing diameter
with the primary growth in the centre.

In the rare cases in which the skin of the greater part of the body is
affected, the nodules rarely appear below the level of the deltoid or
the middle third of the thigh, the patient dying before the spread can
reach the distal portions of the limbs.

Handley argues against the embolic origin of the metastases in the bones
because of the rarity of these in the bones of the distal parts of the
limbs, because of the fact that secondary cancer of the femur nearly
always commences in the upper third of the shaft, which harmonises with
the intimate connection of the deep fascia with the periosteum over the
great trochanter, thus favouring invasion of the bone marrow when
permeation has spread thus far. He claims support for the permeation
theory from the fact that the humerus is rarely involved below the
insertion of the deltoid, and that spontaneous fracture of the femur is
three times more common on the side on which the breast cancer is
situated.

The tumour tissue may undergo necrosis, and when the overlying skin or
mucous membrane gives way an ulcer is formed. The margins of a
_cancerous ulcer_ (Fig. 57) are made up of tumour tissue which has not
broken down. Usually they are irregular, nodularly thickened or
indurated; sometimes they are raised and crater-like. The floor of the
ulcer is smooth and glazed, or occupied by necrosed tissue, and the
discharge is watery and blood-stained, and as a result of putrefactive
changes may become offensive. Haemorrhage is rarely a prominent feature,
but discharge of blood may constitute a symptom of considerable
diagnostic importance in cancer of internal organs such as the rectum,
the bladder, or the uterus.

[Illustration: FIG. 57.--Carcinoma of Breast with Cancerous Ulcer.]

_The Contagiousness of Cancer._--A limited number of cases are on record
in which a cancer appears to have been transferred by contact, as from
the lower to the upper lip, from one labium majus to the other, from the
tongue to the cheek, and from one vocal cord to the other; these being
all examples of cancer involving surfaces which are constantly or
frequently in contact. The transference of cancer from one human being
to another, whether by accident, as in the case of a surgeon wounding
his finger while operating for cancer, or by the deliberate introduction
of a portion of cancerous tumour into the tissues, has never been known
to occur. It is by no means infrequent, however, that when recurrence
takes place after an operation for the removal of cancer, the recurrent
nodules make their appearance in the main scar or in the scars of
stitches in its neighbourhood. In the lower animals the grafting of
cancer only succeeds in animals of the same species; for example, a
cancer taken from a mouse will not grow in the tissues of a rat, but
only in a mouse of the same variety as that from which the graft was
taken.

While cancer cannot be regarded as either contagious or infectious, it
is important to bear in mind the possibility of infection of a wound
with cancer when operating for the disease. A cancer should not be cut
into unless this is essential for purposes of diagnosis, and the wound
made for exploration should be tightly closed by stitches before the
curative operation is proceeded with; the instruments used for the
exploration must not be used again until they have been boiled. The
greatest care should be taken that a cancer which has softened or broken
down is not opened into during the operation.

Investigations regarding the cause of cancer have been prosecuted with
great energy during recent years, but as yet without positive result. It
is recognised that there are a number of conditions which favour the
development of cancer, such as prolonged irritation, and a considerable
number of cases have been recorded in which cancer of the skin of the
hands has followed prolonged and repeated exposure to the Rontgen rays.

_The Alleged Increase of Cancer._--Regarding the alleged increase of
cancer, it may be pointed out that it is impossible to ascertain how
much of the apparent increase is due to more accurate diagnosis and
improved registration. It is probable also that some increase has taken
place in consequence of the increased average duration of life; a larger
proportion of persons now reach the age at which cancer is frequent.

_The prognosis_ largely depends on the variety of cancer and on its
situation. Certain varieties--such as the atrophic cancer of the breast
which occurs in old people, and some forms of cancer in the rectum--are
so indolent in their progress that they can scarcely be said to shorten
life; while others--such as the softer varieties of mammary cancer
occurring in young women--are among the most malignant of tumours. The
mode in which cancer causes death depends to a large extent upon its
situation. In the gullet, for example, it usually causes death by
starvation; in the larynx or thyreoid, by suffocation; in the intestine,
by obstruction of the bowels; in the uterus, prostate, and bladder, by
haemorrhage or by implication of the ureters and kidneys. Independently
of their situation, however, cancers frequently cause death by giving
rise to a progressive impairment of health known as the _cancerous
cachexia_, a condition which is due to the continued absorption of
poisonous products from the tumour. The patient loses appetite, becomes
emaciated, pale, and feverish, and gradually loses strength until he
dies. In many cases, especially those in which ulceration has occurred,
the addition of pyogenic infection may also be concerned in the failure
of health.

_Treatment._--Removal by surgical means affords the best prospect of
cure. If carcinomatous disease is to be rooted out, its mode of spread
by means of the lymph vessels must be borne in mind, and as this occurs
at an early stage, and is not evident on examination, a wide area must
be included in the operation. The organ from which the original growth
springs should, if practicable, be altogether removed, because its lymph
vessels generally communicate freely with each other, and secondary
deposits have probably already taken place in various parts of it. In
addition, the nearest chain of lymph glands must also be removed, even
though they may not be noticeably enlarged, and in some cases--in cancer
of the breast, for example--the intervening lymph vessels should be
removed at the same time.

The treatment of cancer by other than operative methods has received a
great deal of attention within recent years, and many agents have been
put to the test, _e.g._ colloidal suspensions of selenium, but without
any positive results. Most benefit has resulted from the use of radium
and of the X-rays, and one or other should be employed as a routine
measure after every operation for cancer.

It has been demonstrated that cancer cells are more sensitive to radium
and to the Rontgen rays than the normal cells of the body, and are more
easily killed. The effect varies a good deal with the nature and seat of
the tumour. In rodent cancers of the skin, for example, both radium and
X-ray treatment are very successful, and are to be preferred to
operation because they yield a better cosmetic result. While small
epitheliomas of the skin may be cured by means of the rays, they are not
so amenable as rodent cancers.

Cancers of mucous membranes are less amenable to ray treatment because
they are less circumscribed and are difficult of access. In cancers
under the skin, the Rontgen rays are less efficient; if radium is
employed, the tube containing it should be inserted into the substance
of the tumour after the method described in connection with sarcoma--and
another tube should be placed on the overlying skin.

In the employment of X-rays and of radium in the treatment of cancer,
experience is required, not only to obtain the maximum effect of the
rays, but to avoid damage to the adjacent and overlying tissues.

Ray treatment is not to be looked upon as a rival but as a powerful
supplement to the operative treatment of cancer.


VARIETIES OF CANCER

The varieties of cancer are distinguished according to the character and
arrangement of the epithelial cells.

The _squamous epithelial cancer_ or _epithelioma_ originates from a
surface covered by squamous epithelium, such as the skin, or the mucous
membrane of the mouth, gullet, or larynx. The cancer cells retain the
characters of squamous epithelium, and, being confined within the lymph
spaces of the sub-epithelial connective tissue, become compressed and
undergo a horny change. This results in the formation of concentrically
laminated masses known as cell nests.

The clinical features are those of a slowly growing indurated tumour,
which nearly always ulcerates; there is a characteristic induration of
the edges and floor of the ulcer, and its surface is often covered with
warty or cauliflower-like outgrowths (Fig. 58). The infection of the
lymph glands is early and constant, and constitutes the most dangerous
feature of the disease; the secondary growths in the glands exhibit the
characteristic induration, and may themselves break down and lead to the
formation of ulcers.

[Illustration: FIG. 58.--Epithelioma of Lip.]

Epithelioma frequently originates in long-standing ulcers or sinuses,
and in scars, and probably results from the displacement and
sequestration of epithelial cells during the process of cicatrisation.

The _columnar epithelial cancer_ or _columnar epithelioma_ originates in
mucous membranes covered with columnar epithelium, and is chiefly met
with in the stomach and intestine. As it resembles an adenoma in
structure it is sometimes described as a _malignant adenoma_. Its
malignancy is shown by the proliferating epithelium invading the other
coats of the stomach or intestine, and by the development of secondary
growths.

_Glandular carcinoma_ originates in organs such as the breast, and in
the glands of mucous membranes and skin. The epithelial cells are not
arranged on any definite plan, but are closely packed in irregularly
shaped alveoli. If the alveoli are large and the intervening stroma is
scanty and delicate, the tumour is soft and brain-like, and is described
as a _medullary_ or _encephaloid cancer_. If the alveoli are small and
the intervening stroma is abundant and composed of dense fibrous tissue,
the tumour is hard, and is known as a _scirrhous cancer_--a form which
is most frequently met with in the breast. If the cells undergo
degeneration and absorption and the stroma contracts, the tumour becomes
still harder, and tends to shrink and to draw in the surrounding parts,
leading, in the breast, to retraction of the nipple and overlying skin,
and in the stomach and colon to narrowing of the lumen. When the cells
of the tumour undergo colloid degeneration, a _colloid cancer_ results;
if the degeneration is complete, as may occur in the breast, the
malignancy is thereby greatly diminished; if only partial, as is more
common in rectal cancer, the malignancy is not appreciably affected.
Melanin pigment is formed in relation to the cells and stroma of certain
epithelial tumours, giving rise to _melanotic cancer_, one of the most
malignant of all new growths. Cyst-like spaces may form in the tumour by
the accumulation of the secretion of the epithelial cells, or as a
result of their degeneration--_cystic carcinoma_. This is met with
chiefly in the breast and ovary, and the tumour resembles the cystic
adenoma, but it tends to infect its surroundings and gives rise to
secondary growths.

_Rodent cancer_ originates in the glands of the skin, and presents a
special tendency to break down and ulcerate on the surface (Figs. 102
and 103). It almost never infects the lymph glands.


DERMOIDS

A dermoid is a tumour containing skin or mucous membrane, occurring in a
situation where these tissues are not met under normal conditions.

The _skin dermoid_, or _derma-cyst_ as it has been called by Askanazy,
arises from a portion of epiblast, which has become sequestrated during
the process of coalescence of two cutaneous surfaces in development.
This form is therefore most frequently met with on the face and neck in
the situations which correspond to the various clefts and fissures of
the embryo. It occurs also on the trunk in situations where the lateral
halves of the body coalesce during development. Such a dermoid usually
takes the form of a globular cyst, the wall of which consists of skin,
and the contents of turbid fluid containing desquamated epithelium, fat
droplets, cholestrol crystals, and detached hairs. Delicate hairs may
also be found projecting from the epithelial lining of the cyst.

Faulty coalescence of the cutaneous covering of the back occurs most
frequently over the lower sacral vertebrae, giving rise to small
congenital recesses, known as post-anal dimples and coccygeal sinuses.
These recesses are lined with skin, which is furnished with hairs,
sebaceous and sweat glands. If the external orifice becomes occluded,
there results a dermoid cyst.

_Tubulo-dermoids_ arise from embryonic ducts and passages that are
normally obliterated at birth, for example, _lingual dermoids_ develop
in relation to the thyreo-glossal duct; _rectal and post-rectal_
dermoids to the post-anal gut; and _branchial dermoids_ in relation to
the branchial clefts. Tubulo-dermoids present the same structure as skin
dermoids, save that mucous membrane takes the place of skin in the wall
of the cyst, and the contents consist of the pent-up secretion of mucous
glands.

_Clinical Features._--Although dermoids are of congenital origin, they
are rarely evident at birth, and may not give rise to visible tumours
until puberty, when the skin and its appendages become more active, or
not till adult life. Superficial dermoids, such as those met with at the
outer angle of the orbit, form rounded, definitely limited tumours over
which the skin is freely movable. They are usually adherent to the
deeper parts, and when situated over the skull may be lodged in a
depression or actual gap in the bone. Sometimes the cyst becomes
infected and suppurates, and finally ruptures on the surface. This may
lead to a natural cure, or a persistent sinus may form. Dermoids more
deeply placed, such as those within the thorax, or those situated
between the rectum and sacrum, give rise to difficulty in diagnosis,
even with the help of the X-rays, and their nature is seldom recognised
until the escape of the contents--particularly hairs--supplies the clue.
The literature of dermoid cysts is full of accounts of puzzling tumours
met with in all sorts of situations.

The treatment is to remove the cyst. When it is impossible to remove the
whole of the lining membrane by dissection, the portion that is left
should be destroyed with the cautery.

_Ovarian Dermoids._--Dermoids are not uncommon in the ovary (Fig. 59).
They usually take the form of unilocular or multilocular cysts, the
wall of which contains skin, mucous membrane, hair follicles, sebaceous,
sweat, and mucous glands, nails, teeth, nipples, and mammary glands. The
cavity of the cyst usually contains a pultaceous mixture of shed
epithelium, fluid fat, and hair. If the cyst ruptures, the epithelial
elements are diffused over the peritoneum, and may give rise to
secondary dermoids.

[Illustration: FIG. 59.--Dermoid Cyst of Ovary showing Teeth in its
interior.]

The ovarian dermoid appears clinically as an abdominal or pelvic tumour
provided with a pedicle; if the pedicle becomes twisted, the tumour
undergoes strangulation, an event which is attended with urgent
symptoms, not unlike those of strangulated hernia.

The treatment consists in removing the tumour by laparotomy.

#Teratoma.#--A teratoma is believed to result from partial dichotomy or
cleavage of the trunk axis of the embryo, and is found exclusively in
connection with the skull and vertebral column. It may take the form of
a monstrosity such as conjoined twins or a parasitic foetus, but more
commonly it is met with as an irregularly shaped tumour, usually growing
from the sacrum. On dissection, such a tumour is found to contain a
curious mixture of tissues--bones, skin, and portions of viscera, such
as the intestine or liver. The question of the removal of the tumour
requires to be considered in relation to the conditions present in each
individual case.


CYSTS[3]

[3] Cysts which form in relation to new-growths have been considered
with tumours.

Cysts are rounded sacs, the wall being composed of fibrous tissue lined
by epithelium or endothelium; the contents are fluid or semi-solid, and
vary in character according to the tissue in which the cyst has
originated.

_Retention and Exudation Cysts._--_Retention cysts_ develop when the
duct of a secreting gland is partly obstructed; the secretion
accumulates, and the gland and its duct become distended into a cyst.
They are met with in the mamma and in the salivary glands. Sebaceous
cysts or wens are described with diseases of the skin. _Exudation cysts_
arise from the distension of cavities which are not provided with
excretory ducts, such as those in the thyreoid.

_Implantation cysts_ are caused by the accidental transference of
portions of the epidermis into the underlying connective tissue, as may
occur in wounds by needles, awls, forks, or thorns. The implanted
epidermis proliferates and forms a small cyst. They are met with chiefly
on the palmar aspect of the fingers, and vary in size from a split pea
to a cherry. The treatment consists in removing them by dissection.

_Parasitic cysts_ are produced by the growth within the tissues of
cyst-forming parasites, the best known being the taenia echinococcus,
which gives rise to the _hydatid cyst_. The liver is by far the most
common site of hydatid cysts in the human subject.

With regard to the further life-history of hydatids, the living elements
of the cyst may die and degenerate, or the cyst may increase in size
until it ruptures. As a result of pyogenic infection the cyst may be
converted into an abscess.

The _clinical features_ of hydatids vary so much with their situation
and size, that they are best discussed with the individual organs. In
general it may be said that there is a slow formation of a globular,
elastic, fluctuating, painless swelling. Fluctuation is detected when
the cyst approaches the surface, and it is then also that percussion
may elicit the "hydatid thrill" or fremitus. This thrill is not often
obtainable, and in any case is not pathognomonic of hydatids, as it may
be elicited in ascites and in other abdominal cysts. Pressure of the
cyst upon adjacent structures, and the occurrence of suppuration, are
attended with characteristic clinical features.

The _diagnosis_ of hydatids will be considered with the individual
organs. The disease is more common in certain parts of Australia and in
Shetland and Iceland than in countries where the association of dogs in
the domestic life of the inhabitants is less intimate. Pfeiler, who has
worked at the _serum diagnosis of hydatid disease_, regards the
complement deviation method as the most reliable; he believes that a
positive reaction may almost be regarded as absolutely diagnostic of an
echinococcal lesion.

The _treatment_ is to excise the cyst completely, or to inject into it a
1 per cent. solution of formalin. In operating upon hydatids the utmost
care must be taken to avoid leakage of the contents of the cyst, as
these may readily disseminate the infection.

A _blood cyst_ or haematoma results from the encapsulation of
extravasated blood in the tissues, from haemorrhage taking place into a
preformed cyst, or from the saccular pouching of a varicose vein.

A _lymph cyst_ usually results from a contusion in which the skin is
forcibly displaced from the subjacent tissues, and lymph vessels are
thereby torn across. The cyst is usually situated between the skin and
fascia, and contains clear or blood-stained serum. At first it is lax
and fluctuates readily, later it becomes larger and more tense. The
treatment consists in drawing off the contents through a hollow needle
and applying firm pressure. Apart from injury, lymph cysts are met with
as the result of the distension of lymph spaces and vessels
(_lymphangiectasis_); and in lymphangiomas, of which the best-known
example is the cystic hygroma or hydrocele of the neck.


GANGLION

This term is applied to a cyst filled with a clear colourless jelly or
colloid material, met with in the vicinity of a joint or tendon sheath.

The commonest variety--the _carpal ganglion_--popularly known as a
sprained sinew--is met with as a smooth, rounded, or oval swelling on
the dorsal aspect of the carpus, usually towards its radial side (Fig. 60).
It is situated over one of the intercarpal or other joints in this
region, and may be connected with one or other of the extensor tendons.
The skin and fascia are movable over the cyst. The cyst varies in size
from a pea to a pigeon's egg, and usually attains its maximum size
within a few months and then remains stationary. It becomes tense and
prominent when the hand is flexed towards the palm. Its appearance is
usually ascribed to some strain of the wrist--for example, in girls
learning gymnastics. It may cause no symptoms or it may interfere with
the use of the hand, especially in grasping movements and when the hand
is dorsiflexed. In girls it may give rise to pain which shoots up the
arm. Ganglia are also met with on the dorsum of the metacarpus and on
the palmar aspect of the wrist.

[Illustration: FIG. 60.--Carpal Ganglion in a woman aet. 25.]

The _tarsal ganglion_ is situated on the dorsum of the foot over one or
other of the intertarsal joints. It is usually smaller, flatter, and
more tense than that met with over the wrist, so that it is sometimes
mistaken for a bony tumour. It rarely causes symptoms, unless so
situated as to be pressed upon by the boot.

_Ganglia in the region of the knee_ are usually situated over the
interval between the femur and tibia, most often on the lateral aspect
of the joint in front of the tendon of the biceps (Fig. 61). The
swelling, which may attain the size of half a walnut, is tense and hard
when the knee is extended, and becomes softer and more prominent when it
is flexed. They are met with in young adults who follow laborious
occupations or who indulge in athletics, and they cause stiffness,
discomfort, and impairment of the use of the limb. A ganglion is
sometimes met with on the median aspect of the head of the metatarsal
bone of the great toe and may be the cause of considerable suffering; it
is indistinguishable from the thickened and enlarged bursa so commonly
present in this situation in the condition known as bunion.

[Illustration: FIG. 61.--Ganglion on lateral aspect of Knee in a young
woman.]

Ganglionic cysts are met with in other situations than those mentioned,
but they are so rare as not to require separate description.

Ganglia are to be diagnosed by their situation and physical characters;
enlarged bursae, synovial cysts, and new-growths are the swellings most
likely to be mistaken for them. The diagnosis is sometimes only cleared
up by withdrawing the clear, jelly-like contents through a hollow
needle.

_Pathological Anatomy._--The wall of the cyst is composed of fibrous
tissue closely adherent to or fused with the surrounding tissues, so
that it cannot be shelled out. There is no endothelial lining, and the
fibrous tissue of the wall is in immediate contact with the colloid
material in the interior, which appears to be derived by a process of
degeneration from the surrounding connective tissue. In the region of
the knee the ganglion is usually multilocular, and consists of a
meshwork of fibrous tissue, the meshes of which are occupied by colloid
material.

It is often stated that a ganglion originates from a hernial protrusion
of the synovial membrane of a joint or tendon sheath. We have not been
able to demonstrate any communication between the cavity of the cyst
and that of an adjacent tendon sheath or joint. It is possible, however,
that the cyst may originate from a minute portion of synovial membrane
being protruded and strangulated so that it becomes disconnected from
that to which it originally belonged; it may then degenerate and give
rise to colloid material, which accumulates and forms a cyst. Ledderhose
and others regard ganglia as entirely new formations in the
peri-articular tissues, resulting from colloid degeneration of the
fibrous tissue of the capsular ligament, occurring at first in numerous
small areas which later coalesce. Ganglia are probably, therefore, of
the nature of degeneration cysts arising in the capsule of joints, in
tendons, and in their sheaths.

_Treatment._--A ganglion can usually be got rid of by a modification of
the old-fashioned seton. The skin and cyst wall are transfixed by a
stout needle carrying a double thread of silkworm gut; some of the
colourless jelly escapes from the punctures; the ends of the thread are
tied and cut short, and a dressing is applied. A week later the threads
are removed and the minute punctures are sealed with collodion. The
action of the threads is to convert the cyst wall into granulation
tissue, which undergoes the usual conversion into scar tissue. If the
cyst re-forms, it should be removed by open dissection under local
anaesthesia. Puncture with a tenotomy knife and scraping the interior,
and the injection of irritants, are alternative, but less satisfactory,
methods of treatment.

_Ganglia_ in the substance of _tendons_ are rare. The diagnosis rests on
the observation that the small tumour is cystic, and that it follows the
movements of the tendon. The cyst is at first multiple, but the
partitions disappear, and the spaces are thrown into one. The tendon is
so weakened that it readily ruptures. The best treatment is to resect
the affected segment of tendon.

The so-called "compound palmar ganglion" is a tuberculous disease of the
tendon sheaths, and is described with diseases of tendon sheaths.




CHAPTER XI

INJURIES


CONTUSIONS--WOUNDS: _Varieties_--WOUNDS BY FIREARMS AND
    EXPLOSIVES: _Pistol-shot wounds_; _Wounds by sporting guns_;
    _Wounds by rifle bullets_; _Wounds received in warfare_; _Shell
    wounds_. _Embedded foreign bodies_--BURNS AND
    SCALDS--INJURIES PRODUCED BY ELECTRICITY: _X-ray and
    radium_; _Electrical burns_; _Lightning stroke_.


CONTUSIONS

A contusion or bruise is a laceration of the subcutaneous soft tissues,
without solution of continuity of the skin. When the integument gives
way at the same time, a _contused-wound_ results. Bruising occurs when
force is applied to a part by means of a blunt object, whether as a
direct blow, a crush, or a grazing form of violence. If the force acts
at right angles to the part, it tends to produce localised lesions which
extend deeply; while, if it acts obliquely, it gives rise to lesions
which are more diffuse, but comparatively superficial. It is well to
remember that those who suffer from scurvy, or haemophilia (bleeders),
and fat and anaemic females, are liable to be bruised by comparatively
trivial injuries.

_Clinical Features._--The less severe forms of contusion are associated
with _ecchymosis_, numerous minute and discrete punctate haemorrhages
being scattered through the superficial layers of the skin, which is
slightly oedematous. The effused blood is soon reabsorbed.

The more severe forms are attended with _extravasation_, the
extravasated blood being widely diffused through the cellular tissue of
the part, especially where this is loose and lax, as in the region of
the orbit, the scrotum and perineum, and on the chest wall. A blue or
bluish-black discoloration occurs in patches, varying in size and depth
with the degree of force which produced the injury, and in shape with
the instrument employed. It is most intense in regions where the skin is
naturally thin and pigmented. In parts where the extravasated blood is
only separated from the oxygen of the air by a thin layer of epidermis
or by a mucous membrane, it retains its bright arterial colour. These
points are often well illustrated in cases of black eye, where the blood
effused under the conjunctiva is bright red, while that in the eyelids
is almost black. In severe contusions associated with great tension of
the skin--for example, over the front of the tibia or around the
ankle--blisters often form on the surface and constitute a possible
avenue of infection. When deeply situated, the blood tends to spread
along the lines of least resistance, partly under the influence of
gravity, passing under fasciae, between muscles, along the sheaths of
vessels, or in connective-tissue spaces, so that it may only reach the
surface after some time, and at a considerable distance from the seat of
injury. This fact is sometimes of importance in diagnosis, as, for
example, in certain fractures of the base of the skull, where
discoloration appears under the conjunctiva or behind the mastoid
process some days after the accident.

Blood extravasated deeply in the tissues gives rise to a firm,
resistant, doughy swelling, in which there may be elicited on deep
palpation a peculiar sensation, not unlike the crepitus of fracture.

It frequently happens that, from the tearing of lymph vessels, serous
fluid is extravasated, and a _lymphatic_ or _serous cyst_ may form.

In all contusions accompanied by extravasation, there is marked swelling
of the area involved, as well as pain and tenderness. The temperature
may rise to 101 o F., or, in the large extravasations that occur in
bleeders, even higher--a form of aseptic fever. The degree of shock is
variable, but sudden syncope frequently results from severe bruises of
the testicle, abdomen, or head, and occasionally marked nervous
depression follows these injuries.

Contusion of muscles or nerves may produce partial atrophy and paresis,
as is often seen after injuries in the region of the shoulder.

In alcoholic or other debilitated patients, suppuration is liable to
ensue in bruised parts, infection taking place from cocci circulating in
the blood, or through the overlying skin.

_Terminations of Contusions._--The usual termination is a complete
return to the normal, some of the extravasated blood being organised,
but most of it being reabsorbed. During the process characteristic
alterations in the colour of the effused blood take place as a result of
changes in the blood pigment. In from twenty-four to forty-eight hours
the margins of the blue area become of a violet hue, and as time goes on
the discoloured area increases in size, and becomes successively green,
yellow, and lemon-coloured at its margins, the central part being the
last to change. The rate at which this play of colours proceeds is so
variable, and depends on so many circumstances, that no time-limits can
be laid down. During the disintegration of the effused blood the
adjacent lymph glands may become enlarged, and on dissection may be
found to be pigmented. Sometimes the blood persists as a collection of
fluid with a newly formed connective-tissue capsule, constituting a
_haematoma_ or _blood cyst_, more often met with in the scalp than in
other parts.

The impairment of the blood supply of the skin may lead to the formation
of _blisters_, or to _necrosis_. Death of skin is more liable to occur
in bleeders, and when the slough separates the blood-clot is exposed and
the reparative changes go on extremely slowly. _Suppuration_ may occur
and lead to the formation of an abscess as a result of direct infection
from the skin or through the circulation.

_Treatment._--If the patient is seen immediately after the accident,
elevation of the part, and firm pressure applied by means of a thick pad
of cotton wool and an elastic bandage, are useful in preventing effusion
of blood. Ice-bags and evaporating lotions are to be used with caution,
as they are liable to lower the vitality of the damaged tissues and lead
to necrosis of the skin.

When extravasation has already taken place, massage is the most speedy
and efficacious means of dispersing the effused blood. The part should
be massaged several times a day, unless the presence of blebs or
abrasions of the skin prevents this being done. When this is the case,
the use of antiseptic dressings is called for to prevent infection and
to promote healing, after which massage is employed.

When the tension caused by the extravasated blood threatens the vitality
of the skin, incisions may be made, if asepsis can be assured. The blood
from a haematoma may be withdrawn by an exploring needle, and the
puncture sealed with collodion. Infective complications must be looked
for and dealt with on general principles.


WOUNDS

A wound is a solution in the continuity of the skin or mucous membrane
and of the underlying tissues, caused by violence.

Three varieties of wounds are described: incised, punctured, and
contused and lacerated.

#Incised Wounds.#--Typical examples of incised wounds are those made by
the surgeon in the course of an operation, wounds accidentally inflicted
by cutting instruments, and suicidal cut-throat wounds. It should be
borne in mind in connection with medico-legal inquiries, that wounds of
soft parts that closely overlie a bone, such as the skull, the tibia, or
the patella, although, inflicted by a blunt instrument, may have all the
appearances of incised wounds.

_Clinical Features._--One of the characteristic features of an incised
wound is its tendency to gape. This is evident in long skin wounds, and
especially when the cut runs across the part, or when it extends deeply
enough to divide muscular fibres at right angles to their long axis. The
gaping of a wound, further, is more marked when the underlying tissues
are in a state of tension--as, for example, in inflamed parts. Incised
wounds in the palm of the hand, the sole of the foot, or the scalp,
however, have little tendency to gape, because of the close attachment
of the skin to the underlying fascia.

Incised wounds, especially in inflamed tissues, tend to bleed profusely;
and when a vessel is only partly divided and is therefore unable to
contract, it continues to bleed longer than when completely cut across.

The _special risks_ of incised wounds are: (1) division of large blood
vessels, leading to profuse haemorrhage; (2) division of nerve-trunks,
resulting in motor and sensory disturbances; and (3) division of tendons
or muscles, interfering with movement.

_Treatment._--If haemorrhage is still going on, it must be arrested by
pressure, torsion, or ligature, as the accumulation of blood in a wound
interferes with union. If necessary, the wound should be purified by
washing with saline solution or eusol, and the surrounding skin painted
with iodine, after which the edges are approximated by sutures. The raw
surfaces must be brought into accurate apposition, care being taken that
no inversion of the cutaneous surface takes place. In extensive and deep
wounds, to ensure more complete closure and to prevent subsequent
stretching of the scar, it is advisable to unite the different
structures--muscles, fasciae, and subcutaneous tissue--by separate series
of _buried sutures_ of catgut or other absorbable material. For the
approximation of the skin edges, stitches of horse-hair, fishing-gut, or
fine silk are the most appropriate. These _stitches of coaptation_ may
be interrupted or continuous. In small superficial wounds on exposed
parts, stitch marks may be avoided by approximating the edges with
strips of gauze fixed in position by collodion, or by subcutaneous
sutures of fine catgut. Where the skin is loose, as, for example, in the
neck, on the limbs, or in the scrotum, the use of Michel's clips is
advantageous in so far as these bring the deep surfaces of the skin into
accurate apposition, are introduced with comparatively little pain, and
leave only a slight mark if removed within forty-eight hours.

When there is any difficulty in bringing the edges of the wound into
apposition, a few interrupted _relaxation stitches_ may be introduced
wide of the margins, to take the strain off the coaptation stitches.
Stout silk, fishing-gut, or silver wire may be employed for this
purpose. When the tension is extreme, Lister's button suture may be
employed. The tension is relieved and death of skin prevented by scoring
it freely with a sharp knife. Relaxation stitches should be removed in
four or five days, and stitches of coaptation in from seven to ten days.
On the face and neck, wounds heal rapidly, and stitches may be removed
in two or three days, thus diminishing the marks they leave.

_Drainage._--In wounds in which no cavity has been left, and in which
there is no reason to suspect infection, drainage is unnecessary. When,
however, the deeper parts of an extensive wound cannot be brought into
accurate apposition, and especially when there is any prospect of oozing
of blood or serum--as in amputation stumps or after excision of the
breast--drainage is indicated. It is a wise precaution also to insert
drainage tubes into wounds in fat patients when there is the slightest
reason to suspect the presence of infection. Glass or rubber tubes are
the best drains; but where it is desirable to leave little mark, a few
strands of horse-hair, or a small roll of rubber, form a satisfactory
substitute. Except when infection occurs, the drain is removed in from
one to four days and the opening closed with a Michel's clip or a
suture.

#Punctured Wounds.#--Punctured wounds are produced by narrow, pointed
instruments, and the sharper and smoother the instrument the more does
the resulting injury resemble an incised wound; while from more rounded
and rougher instruments the edges of the wound are more or less contused
or lacerated. The depth of punctured wounds greatly exceeds their width,
and the damage to subcutaneous parts is usually greater than that to the
skin. When the instrument transfixes a part, the edges of the wound of
entrance may be inverted, and those of the exit wound everted. If the
instrument is a rough one, these conditions may be reversed by its
sudden withdrawal.

Punctured wounds neither gape nor bleed much. Even when a large vessel
is implicated, the bleeding usually takes place into the tissues rather
than externally.

The _risks_ incident to this class of wounds are: (1) the extreme
difficulty, especially when a dense fascia has been perforated, of
rendering them aseptic, on account of the uncertainty as to their depth,
and of the way in which the surface wound closes on the withdrawal of
the instrument; (2) different forms of aneurysm may result from the
puncture of a large vessel; (3) perforation of a joint, or of a serous
cavity, such as the abdomen, thorax, or skull, materially adds to the
danger.
